Hi and welcome back.
In this video we're going to talk about copying a file.
And we're gonna do so with a small exercise.
What I've done is still in my project,
just to keep things simple,
I've created a new Python file called Friends.py,
and throughout this project
we're going to be running this file.
I've also created two text files,
nearby_friends.txt, and people.txt.
Inside people.txt you can write a bunch of names.
I'm going to go with the staples of Teclado,
starting with Rolf of course,
and there gonna some Charlies in there.
And these people are just people that are
somewhere near you let's say.
Inside our Friends.py file now we're going to
write a short programme that is going to first
ask the user for a list of three friends.
Then for each friend we're gonna tell the user
whether they're in the same city.
And finally for each friend that is in the same city,
we're going to save them to the nearby friends file.
So it has to do three things.
First ask the user for three friends.
You can do this either using the split method of string,
or you can ask for three distinct friends,
that's fine, three inputs.
Then you'll have to open the people.txt file
and read all of the lines.
You may hint, readlines.
Readlines could be interesting for this exercise.
I recommend that you Google it
and see what you can find.
But of course we're going to implement this
in the project in just a moment.
So you want to read all of the lines in people,
and that's going to give you a list of strings,
a string per line, that's the friends,
or rather that's the people nearby.
Then we're going to compare the people in that file
with the friends that the user entered.
If the friend is amongst those people
we're going to tell the user
and also put them into this file.
So were effectively copying the people file
into the nearby friends file, selectively,
allowing the user to choose which friends they want to copy.
So I'd advise now, I know that this is
a larger undertaking that we've done previously,
and I don't necessarily expect you
to do this right off the bat.
However, by building projects and by struggling a little bit
that is the best way to learn and to really get
familiar with the research that you have to do
in order to become proficient at programming.
So I'd encourage you to pause the video,
give it a go for maybe 20 to 30 minutes,
and then come back
and we will continue implementing this project here,
and I'll explain all the choices that I make
in order to get it to work.
Let's go for it.
Okay I'm sure that you at least
got someplace with this project.
I am confident that you've managed to do
some of the things here, if not all of them.
Now if you do have any trouble,
and things that you're not really sure of
feel free to ask in the course Q & A
before watching this, and I'll be glad to help you
in order to solve any doubts you have
as your own research.
But once you're ready we can continue
and complete this project here.
The first thing to do is to ask the user
for a list of three friends.
So for this I'm going to use the input function of course.
Send I'm going to say enter three friends names
separated by commas, no spaces please.
Now these friends names are going to be
something like Rolf, Jose, Charlie,
something like this is what the user is gonna enter.
So this is going to be a string
that has three friend names separated by commas.
And whenever you have a string that has a separator in it,
like the comma in this case, you can do .split.
And what this does is instead of a string
with two commas and three names,
it's going to give you something that looks like this.
That's a list of three elements.
Notice how the commas are now gone,
they are part of the list,
and instead the elements are made up
into a list of individual names.
That's what the split method does,
I'm not sure if we've looked at that one before.
And nonetheless, that's how you can split a string
into multiple constituent parts.
Of course if you had asked friend one
and said input enter your first friend,
that's totally cool.
That is the way that I would expect you to do it
if you didn't know about this split method, and that's okay.
Now that we've got a list of friends,
of course if you did ask for friend one,
friend two, friend three, then I would expect you
at some point to have created a list
of friend one, friend two, and friend three.
That way you would have a list of friends,
as opposed to three independent variables.
This would be a great way to do it without the split method.
Now that we've got a list of friends though,
we can open people.txt
and read it so that we know the people that are nearby.
So again we're gonna open people.txt
in read mode of course, because we are just reading it,
we're not gonna write to this file,
we're gonna write to the other file.
And then we're gonna look for people
who are in the same city or people that are nearby.
People that are nearby is gonna be file or people.readlines.
The readlines method that I suggested as a hint earlier on
isn't just going to read the file,
but giving you a list of line one,
line two, line three, line four,
which is a pretty handy way of reading a file.
Especially because we've got one friend per line
in our data file.
So that's a good way to go about it.
And if through your research
you didn't quite find this method, that's totally fine,
I'm sure at that point if you couldn't find that method
that was the point where you thought,
you know, I need to keep watching this.
And that's totally fine, of course I don't expect you
to know everything about files
when we haven't even covered it yet.
But nonetheless it's always good to do some research.
Even if you don't find anything,
it's good to train yourself to do that.
And at the end of course we're going to close the file.
Now that we've read it
and we've got our contents in this variable,
we no longer need the file for anything,
we can still access the file with the values.
Next, we're going to find out which people
are friends who are also nearby.
So the best way to do that would be with a set.
And so we've looked at sets before.
What I'll do now is say something like friends set
is a set of friends.
This turns the friends list up here
into a set removing duplicates,
and also making it on order,
and allows us to do things like intersection
which are going to be pretty handy.
Then we'd turn the people nearby into a set.
So now we have two sets, one of friends,
and one of people nearby.
And now we know of course to get the ones that match,
the friends that are nearby, we just need to intersect them.
So we'll do friends_set.intersection,
people nearby set.
And that gives you the friends that are nearby,
because it gives you the elements that match
on both friends set and people nearby set.
Now that we've got our friends that are nearby
we can open the open the nearby friends.txt file,
so let's say nearby friends file
is gonna be open nearby_friends.txt.
And this time it's going to be in write mode
because we're going to be writing some data to it.
And then we can iterate over our nearby friends
for friends nearby set.
I'm gonna call it friends nearby set,
just for consistency since these are all called set.
And we're just going to say hey,
this friend is nearby,
I'm gonna say friend is nearby!
Meet up with them.
And we're also going to save them to the file.
So that would be nearby_friends_file.write,
and then friend.
Now there are a couple of problems
with this code here.
So the first thing we have to do of course,
before we run it, is,
sorry I just pressed the Siri button there by accident,
there's a touch screen, this touch bar thing,
we have to close the file.
Of course, remember to close it
otherwise it will keep open between executions,
even after you've closed the programme, not a good thing.
Okay, so let's run it.
And we can see that it asks us to enter three friend names,
separated by commas, so we can enter
Rolf, Charlie, and Rudolf for example.
That one doesn't exist, but we should get two, right.
Hmm, we get nothing.
Let's check the nearby friends file.
It's got nothing.
So I wonder why that is?
Well, what happens when we encounter a bug?
Of course we must look at the checklist
that I provided earlier, in the last section,
of looking at our code first of all.
So I'm gonna minimise this thing here.
We're gonna once again go through this code
and what it's doing.
We asked the user for some input,
that gets split on the comma.
Now I have got a bit of experience
and I know that this split seems reasonable.
And I know that this is going to provide a list.
So, okay, this looks good so far.
We're opening a file for reading.
And we did this earlier on and it worked fine,
used the same syntax, so this is okay.
And then we're reading the lines.
We didn't readlines earlier on,
so we're not really sure what this is doing.
Then we're closing the file, this seems legitimate.
Then we've got a set of our friends,
and we've looked at sets earlier on,
but I'm not sure if we actually converted a list to a set.
So maybe this is something that we have
to look into before we continue.
As you can see there's a couple of unknowns in this programme.
Like what exactly is readlines doing?
What exactly is set doing?
And we're calling it again,
now I'm telling you these are giving you sets,
and this is the intersection of the two,
so these should be the friends that match.
But then what we're doing is opening the file for writing
and iterating over the friends, and picking them out.
So there's really nothing that could go wrong in here.
The only things that could go wrong is either readlines,
which we are not really sure what it's doing.
We've used it and I've told you what it does,
but maybe there's some small nuance there
that we're not sure about.
And of course the set.
So we didn't get an error,
the checklist for error handling said
that you should copy the error
and go into Google and paste it in.
There's no error here.
So maybe we don't want to go to Google just yet.
We could go through our programme as the computer
checking exactly what we've entered,
exactly what it turns out, and exactly what everything does,
but it's more difficult to do that
because we're not 100% confident on everything
that every single line of code is doing.
And if you're ever at that stage
where you're not 100% confident
that something is doing what you expect,
you have to really be honest with yourself and say,
you know I've never actually ran this before,
maybe it's doing something unexpected.
And I've from this before so I know exactly
what the problem is, (chuckles) but you don't know this.
So the first thing to do is to set a breakpoint
where you are least comfortable,
or rather where the discomfort begins.
So set a breakpoint,
and then just run the programme using the debugger.
Debugger is extremely useful.
So as you can see the first thing that we get is a console,
and it asks us to enter three friends names.
So let's enter the same thing as before
Rolf, Charlie, Rudolph.
So we have our friends list.
As you can see down here it's a list of three elements.
So we're pretty confident on the split method,
and indeed it seems to be giving us what we wanted,
a list of three elements Rolf,
Charlie, and Rudolph down there.
Then we can open the file and we know what this does,
it just gives us a text IO wrapper,
just is a class that allows us to interact with the file.
And then we've got people.readlines.
And so let's press step to the next line.
And then notice that help people nearby
has a quantitive value after we've read the lines,
and the value is a rather bizarre value.
We've got Rolf\n, Jose\n,
Chris\n and so forth until Steve
which does not have a backslash n.
Now I mentioned earlier on, I believe,
what the backslash n means while we were working
on the menu for the milestone project one,
and it's a new line.
So if we opened up people.txt,
you can see that each line has something at the end
that tells the editor to go on to the next line.
Otherwise everything would just continue on the same line.
And that character is the backslash n character,
it means new line.
So we go onto the next line,
and then new line on the end next line, and so forth.
You cannot see that character but it exists,
it is there, that is how the text file knows
to split this into lines, it's not magic.
There is something there telling it go to the next line
and that's this backslash n character.
Okay so now we probably know what the problem is,
but let's continue into the sets
just to analyse exactly what's going on.
We've got a set of three elements,
notice that they are not in the same order,
or in the same order they were before.
We have a set of the people nearby.
And notice how we do have the sets converted here,
but again each element has this backslash n.
So of course when we do the intersection, it's an empty set.
Because Charlie is not equal to Charlie\n,
and Rolf is not equal to Rolf\n.
So this is not going to work.
And at the end of course we iterate over an empty set,
nothing happens and we close the file.
So what can we do?
Well the first thing that I would do
is a list comprehension, and in values comprehension
I would turn the lines into lines
with no backslash n at the end.
So let's do that.
List comprehension, we're going to say line,
strip for line in people.readlines.
Then I'm to set the breakpoint over here
and we're going to debug again.
Enter our three names.
And now notice how the people nearby
no longer have the backslash n.
This is what the strip method does.
Any whitespace like normal spaces,
tabs, or new line characters,
get removed from the start and the end of the string.
So in this case the backslash n's got removed
from the end of the strings,
so that we ended up just with a string with no whitespace.
That's what this strip method does.
Pretty useful, pretty useful method there.
Now we've got the list of people nearby,
these sets are going to match.
You've got Charlie and Charlie, Rudolph and nothing,
and Rolf and Rolf, so let's have a look
see if the friends nearby set does have the values we want.
And indeed it does,
we have Rolf and Charlie our two friends.
And do you notice, the first few times
you run your programmes it may be beneficial
to run through them using the debugger?
Because it just lets you go line by line
examining exactly what's going on.
We've opened the file here,
we're going to iterate over our friends,
the first one we get is Rolf remember,
the set is not ordered so it could be either.
And then we're picking something out,
let's go and check the console.
We can see that world is nearby, we should meet up with him.
And then we're going to write to the friends file.
That has happened but I don't think that the file yet
contains anything, it does not.
Because it won't be saved actually
to the disc until we close the file,
or until we overrun the buffer,
which is not something I want to talk about in this video,
but nonetheless.
Those are the only two moments
when the file actually gets saved to the disc,
it doesn't get saved instantly
in order to improve performance.
So again Charlie, same thing happens,
then we move over to closing the file, and we close it.
We've seen that Rolf is nearby
and Charlie is nearby in the console,
and our file should now have our friends.
But of course we didn't include a backslash n character,
so these friends are all in one line.
So if we go back to our Friends.py
and we put a backslash n after friend,
that means that when we write to the file
we write the friend name,
and then we will also write
this invisible new line character
that will move us into the next line,
and then we will write the next friend there as well.
Also the reason I'm adding a new line at the end
is because PEP 8 asks me to.
It's got this grey squiggly line there.
So yeah.
Okay now we are happy with the way our programme runs,
we can remove the breakpoint
and just play it in normal mode.
Then we can enter three friends.
And you can see that we get Rolf is nearby,
José is nearby, meet up with them.
I thought we had that Anne in people, but I guess it's Anna.
Yep, and then we can go and check our nearby friends,
and we see that they are in now two lines.
Also noticed so that we have line number three,
which is an empty line.
We didn't have that in people.
And to be honest I think that we should have
an empty line at the end,
just so every line is the same.
Every line has the new line character
as opposed to the last line
not having the new line character.
So I'm okay with this.
But of course if you are not,
you can try to experiment with your code.
Make it only print the new line character
when you are not printing the last element of the set.
You can use the innumerate function for that.
I won't go into it in this video,
since we're getting pretty long now.
That's it for this video.
We have created a small app that copies a file selectively.
And we've learned about a bunch of stuff.
First about the new line characters,
they're everywhere and we need to strip them out
if we want to have no whitespace,
that includes spaces, tabs,
and new line characters in a string.
We've learned about the readlines method of the file,
that let's us read each line of the file
as a separate element in a list.
I don't know if we've looked at the split method before,
but if we didn't then we've learned about that.
If we did, we've reviewed it.
It allows us to split a string into constituent parts
according to a particular character in that string.
And then we've also reviewed sets,
and using intersection to calculate matching elements.
Remember I told you that when we looked at sets
that they would be pretty useful?
They are pretty useful.
And finally we also reviewed writing to a file,
something a bit more useful.
So that's it for this video.
Thanks for staying with me and I'll see you on the next one.
Great job today.